<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="chap01.1" name="chap01.1"/> Chapter I: The Extent Of The Empire In The Age Of The Antonines⁠—Part I.</h2>
			<h3>Introduction.</h3>
			<p class="letter">The Extent And Military Force Of The Empire In The Age Of The Antonines.</p>
			<p>In the second century of the Christian Æra, the empire of Rome comprehended the fairest part of the earth, and the most civilized portion of mankind. The frontiers of that extensive monarchy were guarded by ancient renown and disciplined valor. The gentle but powerful influence of laws and manners had gradually cemented the union of the provinces. Their peaceful inhabitants enjoyed and abused the advantages of wealth and luxury. The image of a free constitution was preserved with decent reverence: the Roman senate appeared to possess the sovereign authority, and devolved on the emperors all the executive powers of government. During a happy period of more than fourscore years, the public administration was conducted by the virtue and abilities of Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian, and the two Antonines. It is the design of this, and of the two succeeding chapters, to describe the prosperous condition of their empire; and afterwards, from the death of Marcus Antoninus, to deduce the most important circumstances of its decline and fall; a revolution which will ever be remembered, and is still felt by the nations of the earth.</p>
			<p>The principal conquests of the Romans were achieved under the republic; and the emperors, for the most part, were satisfied with preserving those dominions which had been acquired by the policy of the senate, the active emulations of the consuls, and the martial enthusiasm of the people. The seven first centuries were filled with a rapid succession of triumphs; but it was reserved for Augustus to relinquish the ambitious design of subduing the whole earth, and to introduce a spirit of moderation into the public councils. Inclined to peace by his temper and situation, it was easy for him to discover that Rome, in her present exalted situation, had much less to hope than to fear from the chance of arms; and that, in the prosecution of remote wars, the undertaking became every day more difficult, the event more doubtful, and the possession more precarious, and less beneficial. The experience of Augustus added weight to these salutary reflections, and effectually convinced him that, by the prudent vigor of his counsels, it would be easy to secure every concession which the safety or the dignity of Rome might require from the most formidable barbarians. Instead of exposing his person and his legions to the arrows of the Parthians, he obtained, by an honorable treaty, the restitution of the standards and prisoners which had been taken in the defeat of Crassus. <a href="#linknote-1.1a" id="linknoteref-1.1a" name="linknoteref-1.1a">1a</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.1a" name="linknote-1.1a">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">1 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.1a">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Dion Cassius, (l. liv. p. 736,) with the annotations of Reimar, who has collected all that Roman vanity has left upon the subject. The marble of Ancyra, on which Augustus recorded his own exploits, asserted that <i>he compelled</i> the Parthians to restore the ensigns of Crassus.]</p>
			<p>His generals, in the early part of his reign, attempted the reduction of Ethiopia and Arabia Felix. They marched near a thousand miles to the south of the tropic; but the heat of the climate soon repelled the invaders, and protected the un-warlike natives of those sequestered regions. <a href="#linknote-1.2c" id="linknoteref-1.2c" name="linknoteref-1.2c">2c</a> The northern countries of Europe scarcely deserved the expense and labor of conquest. The forests and morasses of Germany were filled with a hardy race of barbarians, who despised life when it was separated from freedom; and though, on the first attack, they seemed to yield to the weight of the Roman power, they soon, by a signal act of despair, regained their independence, and reminded Augustus of the vicissitude of fortune. <a href="#linknote-1.3a" id="linknoteref-1.3a" name="linknoteref-1.3a">3a</a> On the death of that emperor, his testament was publicly read in the senate. He bequeathed, as a valuable legacy to his successors, the advice of confining the empire within those limits which nature seemed to have placed as its permanent bulwarks and boundaries: on the west, the Atlantic Ocean; the Rhine and Danube on the north; the Euphrates on the east; and towards the south, the sandy deserts of Arabia and Africa. <a href="#linknote-1.4a" id="linknoteref-1.4a" name="linknoteref-1.4a">4a</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.2c" name="linknote-1.2c">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">2c (<a href="#linknoteref-1.2c">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Strabo, (l. xvi. p. 780,) Pliny the elder, (Hist. Natur. l. vi. c. 32, 35, [28, 29,]) and Dion Cassius, (l. liii. p. 723, and l. liv. p. 734,) have left us very curious details concerning these wars. The Romans made themselves masters of Mariaba, or Merab, a city of Arabia Felix, well known to the Orientals. (See Abulfeda and the Nubian geography, p. 52) They were arrived within three days’ journey of the spice country, the rich object of their invasion.</p>
			<p class="foot">Note: It is this city of Merab that the Arabs say was the residence of Belkis, queen of Saba, who desired to see Solomon. A dam, by which the waters collected in its neighborhood were kept back, having been swept away, the sudden inundation destroyed this city, of which, nevertheless, vestiges remain. It bordered on a country called Adramout, where a particular aromatic plant grows: it is for this reason that we real in the history of the Roman expedition, that they were arrived within three days’ journey of the spice country.⁠—G. Compare <i>Malte-Brun, Geogr</i>. Eng. trans. vol. ii. p. 215. The period of this flood has been copiously discussed by Reiske, (<i>Program. de vetustâ Epochâ Arabum, rupturâ cataractæ Merabensis</i>.) Add. Johannsen, <i>Hist. Yemanæ</i>, p. 282. Bonn, 1828; and see Gibbon, note 16. to Chap. L.⁠—M.</p>
			<p class="foot">Note: Two, according to Strabo. The detailed account of Strabo makes the invaders fail before Marsuabæ this cannot be the same place as Mariaba. Ukert observes, that Ælius Gallus would not have failed for want of water before Mariaba. (See M. Guizot’s note above.) “Either, therefore, they were different places, or Strabo is mistaken.” (Ukert, <i>Geographie der Griechen und Römer</i>, vol. i. p. 181.) Strabo, indeed, mentions Mariaba distinct from Marsuabæ. Gibbon has followed Pliny in reckoning Mariaba among the conquests of Gallus. There can be little doubt that he is wrong, as Gallus did not approach the capital of Sabæa. Compare the note of the Oxford editor of Strabo.⁠—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.3a" name="linknote-1.3a">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">3a (<a href="#linknoteref-1.3a">return</a>)<br/>
			[ By the slaughter of Varus and his three legions. See the first book of the Annals of Tacitus. Sueton. in August. c. 23, and Velleius Paterculus, l. ii. c. 117, &amp;c. Augustus did not receive the melancholy news with all the temper and firmness that might have been expected from his character.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.4a" name="linknote-1.4a">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">4a (<a href="#linknoteref-1.4a">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Tacit. Annal. l. ii. Dion Cassius, l. lvi. p. 833, and the speech of Augustus himself, in Julian’s Cæsars. It receives great light from the learned notes of his French translator, M. Spanheim.]</p>
			<p>Happily for the repose of mankind, the moderate system recommended by the wisdom of Augustus, was adopted by the fears and vices of his immediate successors. Engaged in the pursuit of pleasure, or in the exercise of tyranny, the first Cæsars seldom showed themselves to the armies, or to the provinces; nor were they disposed to suffer, that those triumphs which <i>their</i> indolence neglected, should be usurped by the conduct and valor of their lieutenants. The military fame of a subject was considered as an insolent invasion of the Imperial prerogative; and it became the duty, as well as interest, of every Roman general, to guard the frontiers intrusted to his care, without aspiring to conquests which might have proved no less fatal to himself than to the vanquished barbarians. <a href="#linknote-1.5" id="linknoteref-1.5" name="linknoteref-1.5">5</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.5" name="linknote-1.5">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">5 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.5">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Germanicus, Suetonius Paulinus, and Agricola were checked and recalled in the course of their victories. Corbulo was put to death. Military merit, as it is admirably expressed by Tacitus, was, in the strictest sense of the word, <i>imperatoria virtus</i>.]</p>
			<p>The only accession which the Roman empire received, during the first century of the Christian Æra, was the province of Britain. In this single instance, the successors of Cæsar and Augustus were persuaded to follow the example of the former, rather than the precept of the latter. The proximity of its situation to the coast of Gaul seemed to invite their arms; the pleasing though doubtful intelligence of a pearl fishery attracted their avarice; <a href="#linknote-1.6" id="linknoteref-1.6" name="linknoteref-1.6">6</a> and as Britain was viewed in the light of a distinct and insulated world, the conquest scarcely formed any exception to the general system of continental measures. After a war of about forty years, undertaken by the most stupid, <a href="#linknote-1.7" id="linknoteref-1.7" name="linknoteref-1.7">7</a> maintained by the most dissolute, and terminated by the most timid of all the emperors, the far greater part of the island submitted to the Roman yoke. <a href="#linknote-1.8" id="linknoteref-1.8" name="linknoteref-1.8">8</a> The various tribes of Britain possessed valor without conduct, and the love of freedom without the spirit of union. They took up arms with savage fierceness; they laid them down, or turned them against each other, with wild inconsistency; and while they fought singly, they were successively subdued. Neither the fortitude of Caractacus, nor the despair of Boadicea, nor the fanaticism of the Druids, could avert the slavery of their country, or resist the steady progress of the Imperial generals, who maintained the national glory, when the throne was disgraced by the weakest, or the most vicious of mankind. At the very time when Domitian, confined to his palace, felt the terrors which he inspired, his legions, under the command of the virtuous Agricola, defeated the collected force of the Caledonians, at the foot of the Grampian Hills; and his fleets, venturing to explore an unknown and dangerous navigation, displayed the Roman arms round every part of the island. The conquest of Britain was considered as already achieved; and it was the design of Agricola to complete and insure his success, by the easy reduction of Ireland, for which, in his opinion, one legion and a few auxiliaries were sufficient. <a href="#linknote-1.9" id="linknoteref-1.9" name="linknoteref-1.9">9</a> The western isle might be improved into a valuable possession, and the Britons would wear their chains with the less reluctance, if the prospect and example of freedom were on every side removed from before their eyes.</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.6" name="linknote-1.6">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">6 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.6">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Cæsar himself conceals that ignoble motive; but it is mentioned by Suetonius, c. 47. The British pearls proved, however, of little value, on account of their dark and livid color. Tacitus observes, with reason, (in Agricola, c. 12,) that it was an inherent defect. “Ego facilius crediderim, naturam margaritis deesse quam nobis avaritiam.”]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.7" name="linknote-1.7">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">7 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.7">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Claudius, Nero, and Domitian. A hope is expressed by Pomponius Mela, l. iii. c. 6, (he wrote under Claudius,) that, by the success of the Roman arms, the island and its savage inhabitants would soon be better known. It is amusing enough to peruse such passages in the midst of London.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.8" name="linknote-1.8">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">8 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.8">return</a>)<br/>
			[ See the admirable abridgment given by Tacitus, in the life of Agricola, and copiously, though perhaps not completely, illustrated by our own antiquarians, Camden and Horsley.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.9" name="linknote-1.9">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">9 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.9">return</a>)<br/>
			[ The Irish writers, jealous of their national honor, are extremely provoked on this occasion, both with Tacitus and with Agricola.]</p>
			<p>But the superior merit of Agricola soon occasioned his removal from the government of Britain; and forever disappointed this rational, though extensive scheme of conquest. Before his departure, the prudent general had provided for security as well as for dominion. He had observed, that the island is almost divided into two unequal parts by the opposite gulfs, or, as they are now called, the Friths of Scotland. Across the narrow interval of about forty miles, he had drawn a line of military stations, which was afterwards fortified, in the reign of Antoninus Pius, by a turf rampart, erected on foundations of stone. <a href="#linknote-1.10" id="linknoteref-1.10" name="linknoteref-1.10">10</a> This wall of Antoninus, at a small distance beyond the modern cities of Edinburgh and Glasgow, was fixed as the limit of the Roman province. The native Caledonians preserved, in the northern extremity of the island, their wild independence, for which they were not less indebted to their poverty than to their valor. Their incursions were frequently repelled and chastised; but their country was never subdued. <a href="#linknote-1.11" id="linknoteref-1.11" name="linknoteref-1.11">11</a> The masters of the fairest and most wealthy climates of the globe turned with contempt from gloomy hills, assailed by the winter tempest, from lakes concealed in a blue mist, and from cold and lonely heaths, over which the deer of the forest were chased by a troop of naked barbarians. <a href="#linknote-1.12" id="linknoteref-1.12" name="linknoteref-1.12">12</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.10" name="linknote-1.10">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">10 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.10">return</a>)<br/>
			[ See Horsley’s Britannia Romana, l. i. c. 10. Note: Agricola fortified the line from Dumbarton to Edinburgh, consequently within Scotland. The emperor Hadrian, during his residence in Britain, about the year 121, caused a rampart of earth to be raised between Newcastle and Carlisle. Antoninus Pius, having gained new victories over the Caledonians, by the ability of his general, Lollius, Urbicus, caused a new rampart of earth to be constructed between Edinburgh and Dumbarton. Lastly, Septimius Severus caused a wall of stone to be built parallel to the rampart of Hadrian, and on the same locality. See John Warburton’s Vallum Romanum, or the History and Antiquities of the Roman Wall. London, 1754, 4to.⁠—W. See likewise a good note on the Roman wall in Lingard’s History of England, vol. i. p. 40, 4to edit⁠—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.11" name="linknote-1.11">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">11 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.11">return</a>)<br/>
			[ The poet Buchanan celebrates with elegance and spirit (see his Sylvæ, v.) the unviolated independence of his native country. But, if the single testimony of Richard of Cirencester was sufficient to create a Roman province of Vespasiana to the north of the wall, that independence would be reduced within very narrow limits.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.12" name="linknote-1.12">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">12 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.12">return</a>)<br/>
			[ See Appian (in Proœm.) and the uniform imagery of Ossian’s Poems, which, according to every hypothesis, were composed by a native Caledonian.]</p>
			<p>Such was the state of the Roman frontiers, and such the maxims of Imperial policy, from the death of Augustus to the accession of Trajan. That virtuous and active prince had received the education of a soldier, and possessed the talents of a general. <a href="#linknote-1.13" id="linknoteref-1.13" name="linknoteref-1.13">13</a> The peaceful system of his predecessors was interrupted by scenes of war and conquest; and the legions, after a long interval, beheld a military emperor at their head. The first exploits of Trajan were against the Dacians, the most warlike of men, who dwelt beyond the Danube, and who, during the reign of Domitian, had insulted, with impunity, the Majesty of Rome. <a href="#linknote-1.14" id="linknoteref-1.14" name="linknoteref-1.14">14</a> To the strength and fierceness of barbarians they added a contempt for life, which was derived from a warm persuasion of the immortality and transmigration of the soul. <a href="#linknote-1.15" id="linknoteref-1.15" name="linknoteref-1.15">15</a> Decebalus, the Dacian king, approved himself a rival not unworthy of Trajan; nor did he despair of his own and the public fortune, till, by the confession of his enemies, he had exhausted every resource both of valor and policy. <a href="#linknote-1.16" id="linknoteref-1.16" name="linknoteref-1.16">16</a> This memorable war, with a very short suspension of hostilities, lasted five years; and as the emperor could exert, without control, the whole force of the state, it was terminated by an absolute submission of the barbarians. <a href="#linknote-1.17" id="linknoteref-1.17" name="linknoteref-1.17">17</a> The new province of Dacia, which formed a second exception to the precept of Augustus, was about thirteen hundred miles in circumference. Its natural boundaries were the Niester, the Teyss or Tibiscus, the Lower Danube, and the Euxine Sea. The vestiges of a military road may still be traced from the banks of the Danube to the neighborhood of Bender, a place famous in modern history, and the actual frontier of the Turkish and Russian empires. <a href="#linknote-1.18" id="linknoteref-1.18" name="linknoteref-1.18">18</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.13" name="linknote-1.13">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">13 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.13">return</a>)<br/>
			[ See Pliny’s Panegyric, which seems founded on facts.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.14" name="linknote-1.14">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">14 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.14">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Dion Cassius, l. lxvii.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.15" name="linknote-1.15">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">15 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.15">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Herodotus, l. iv. c. 94. Julian in the Cæsars, with Spanheims observations.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.16" name="linknote-1.16">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">16 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.16">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Plin. Epist. viii. 9.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.17" name="linknote-1.17">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">17 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.17">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Dion Cassius, l. lxviii. p. 1123, 1131. Julian in Cæsaribus Eutropius, viii. 2, 6. Aurelius Victor in Epitome.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.18" name="linknote-1.18">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">18 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.18">return</a>)<br/>
			[ See a Memoir of M. d’Anville, on the Province of Dacia, in the Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxviii. p. 444⁠—468.]</p>
			<p>Trajan was ambitious of fame; and as long as mankind shall continue to bestow more liberal applause on their destroyers than on their benefactors, the thirst of military glory will ever be the vice of the most exalted characters. The praises of Alexander, transmitted by a succession of poets and historians, had kindled a dangerous emulation in the mind of Trajan. Like him, the Roman emperor undertook an expedition against the nations of the East; but he lamented with a sigh, that his advanced age scarcely left him any hopes of equalling the renown of the son of Philip. <a href="#linknote-1.19" id="linknoteref-1.19" name="linknoteref-1.19">19</a> Yet the success of Trajan, however transient, was rapid and specious. The degenerate Parthians, broken by intestine discord, fled before his arms. He descended the River Tigris in triumph, from the mountains of Armenia to the Persian Gulf. He enjoyed the honor of being the first, as he was the last, of the Roman generals, who ever navigated that remote sea. His fleets ravaged the coast of Arabia; and Trajan vainly flattered himself that he was approaching towards the confines of India. <a href="#linknote-1.20" id="linknoteref-1.20" name="linknoteref-1.20">20</a> Every day the astonished senate received the intelligence of new names and new nations, that acknowledged his sway. They were informed that the kings of Bosphorus, Colchos, Iberia, Albania, Osrhoene, and even the Parthian monarch himself, had accepted their diadems from the hands of the emperor; that the independent tribes of the Median and Carduchian hills had implored his protection; and that the rich countries of Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Assyria, were reduced into the state of provinces. <a href="#linknote-1.21" id="linknoteref-1.21" name="linknoteref-1.21">21</a> But the death of Trajan soon clouded the splendid prospect; and it was justly to be dreaded, that so many distant nations would throw off the unaccustomed yoke, when they were no longer restrained by the powerful hand which had imposed it.</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.19" name="linknote-1.19">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">19 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.19">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Trajan’s sentiments are represented in a very just and lively manner in the Cæsars of Julian.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.20" name="linknote-1.20">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">20 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.20">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Eutropius and Sextus Rufus have endeavored to perpetuate the illusion. See a very sensible dissertation of M. Freret in the Académie des Inscriptions, tom. xxi. p. 55.] <a id="linknote-1.21" name="linknote-1.21"><!-- Note --></a></p>
			<p class="foot">21 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.21">return</a>)<br/>
			[Dion Cassius, l. lxviii.; and the Abbreviators.]</p>
			<h2><a id="chap01.2" name="chap01.2"/> Chapter I: The Extent Of The Empire In The Age Of The Antonines.⁠—Part II.</h2>
			<p>It was an ancient tradition, that when the Capitol was founded by one of the Roman kings, the god Terminus (who presided over boundaries, and was represented, according to the fashion of that age, by a large stone) alone, among all the inferior deities, refused to yield his place to Jupiter himself. A favorable inference was drawn from his obstinacy, which was interpreted by the augurs as a sure presage that the boundaries of the Roman power would never recede. <a href="#linknote-1.22" id="linknoteref-1.22" name="linknoteref-1.22">22</a> During many ages, the prediction, as it is usual, contributed to its own accomplishment. But though Terminus had resisted the Majesty of Jupiter, he submitted to the authority of the emperor Hadrian. <a href="#linknote-1.23" id="linknoteref-1.23" name="linknoteref-1.23">23</a> The resignation of all the eastern conquests of Trajan was the first measure of his reign. He restored to the Parthians the election of an independent sovereign; withdrew the Roman garrisons from the provinces of Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Assyria; and, in compliance with the precept of Augustus, once more established the Euphrates as the frontier of the empire. <a href="#linknote-1.24" id="linknoteref-1.24" name="linknoteref-1.24">24</a> Censure, which arraigns the public actions and the private motives of princes, has ascribed to envy, a conduct which might be attributed to the prudence and moderation of Hadrian. The various character of that emperor, capable, by turns, of the meanest and the most generous sentiments, may afford some color to the suspicion. It was, however, scarcely in his power to place the superiority of his predecessor in a more conspicuous light, than by thus confessing himself unequal to the task of defending the conquests of Trajan.</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.22" name="linknote-1.22">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">22 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.22">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Ovid. Fast. l. ii. ver. 667. See Livy, and Dionysius of Halicarnassus, under the reign of Tarquin.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.23" name="linknote-1.23">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">23 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.23">return</a>)<br/>
			[ St. Augustin is highly delighted with the proof of the weakness of Terminus, and the vanity of the Augurs. See De Civitate Dei, iv. 29. * Note: The turn of Gibbon’s sentence is Augustin’s: “Plus Hadrianum regem hominum, quam regem Deorum timuisse videatur.”⁠—M]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.24" name="linknote-1.24">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">24 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.24">return</a>)<br/>
			[ See the Augustan History, p. 5, Jerome’s Chronicle, and all the Epitomizers. It is somewhat surprising, that this memorable event should be omitted by Dion, or rather by Xiphilin.]</p>
			<p>The martial and ambitious spirit of Trajan formed a very singular contrast with the moderation of his successor. The restless activity of Hadrian was not less remarkable when compared with the gentle repose of Antoninus Pius. The life of the former was almost a perpetual journey; and as he possessed the various talents of the soldier, the statesman, and the scholar, he gratified his curiosity in the discharge of his duty.</p>
			<p>Careless of the difference of seasons and of climates, he marched on foot, and bare-headed, over the snows of Caledonia, and the sultry plains of the Upper Egypt; nor was there a province of the empire which, in the course of his reign, was not honored with the presence of the monarch. <a href="#linknote-1.25" id="linknoteref-1.25" name="linknoteref-1.25">25</a> But the tranquil life of Antoninus Pius was spent in the bosom of Italy, and, during the twenty-three years that he directed the public administration, the longest journeys of that amiable prince extended no farther than from his palace in Rome to the retirement of his Lanuvian villa. <a href="#linknote-1.26" id="linknoteref-1.26" name="linknoteref-1.26">26</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.25" name="linknote-1.25">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">25 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.25">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Dion, l. lxix. p. 1158. Hist. August. p. 5, 8. If all our historians were lost, medals, inscriptions, and other monuments, would be sufficient to record the travels of Hadrian. Note: The journeys of Hadrian are traced in a note on Solvet’s translation of Hegewisch, Essai sur l’Epoque de Histoire Romaine la plus heureuse pour Genre Humain Paris, 1834, p. 123.⁠—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.26" name="linknote-1.26">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">26 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.26">return</a>)<br/>
			[ See the Augustan History and the Epitomes.]</p>
			<p>Notwithstanding this difference in their personal conduct, the general system of Augustus was equally adopted and uniformly pursued by Hadrian and by the two Antonines. They persisted in the design of maintaining the dignity of the empire, without attempting to enlarge its limits. By every honorable expedient they invited the friendship of the barbarians; and endeavored to convince mankind that the Roman power, raised above the temptation of conquest, was actuated only by the love of order and justice. During a long period of forty-three years, their virtuous labors were crowned with success; and if we except a few slight hostilities, that served to exercise the legions of the frontier, the reigns of Hadrian and Antoninus Pius offer the fair prospect of universal peace. <a href="#linknote-1.27" id="linknoteref-1.27" name="linknoteref-1.27">27</a> The Roman name was revered among the most remote nations of the earth. The fiercest barbarians frequently submitted their differences to the arbitration of the emperor; and we are informed by a contemporary historian that he had seen ambassadors who were refused the honor which they came to solicit of being admitted into the rank of subjects. <a href="#linknote-1.28" id="linknoteref-1.28" name="linknoteref-1.28">28</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.27" name="linknote-1.27">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">27 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.27">return</a>)<br/>
			[ We must, however, remember, that in the time of Hadrian, a rebellion of the Jews raged with religious fury, though only in a single province. Pausanias (l. viii. c. 43) mentions two necessary and successful wars, conducted by the generals of Pius: 1st. Against the wandering Moors, who were driven into the solitudes of Atlas. 2d. Against the Brigantes of Britain, who had invaded the Roman province. Both these wars (with several other hostilities) are mentioned in the Augustan History, p. 19.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.28" name="linknote-1.28">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">28 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.28">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Appian of Alexandria, in the preface to his History of the Roman Wars.]</p>
			<p>The terror of the Roman arms added weight and dignity to the moderation of the emperors. They preserved peace by a constant preparation for war; and while justice regulated their conduct, they announced to the nations on their confines, that they were as little disposed to endure, as to offer an injury. The military strength, which it had been sufficient for Hadrian and the elder Antoninus to display, was exerted against the Parthians and the Germans by the emperor Marcus. The hostilities of the barbarians provoked the resentment of that philosophic monarch, and, in the prosecution of a just defence, Marcus and his generals obtained many signal victories, both on the Euphrates and on the Danube. <a href="#linknote-1.29" id="linknoteref-1.29" name="linknoteref-1.29">29</a> The military establishment of the Roman empire, which thus assured either its tranquillity or success, will now become the proper and important object of our attention.</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.29" name="linknote-1.29">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">29 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.29">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Dion, l. lxxi. Hist. August. in Marco. The Parthian victories gave birth to a crowd of contemptible historians, whose memory has been rescued from oblivion and exposed to ridicule, in a very lively piece of criticism of Lucian.]</p>
			<p>In the purer ages of the commonwealth, the use of arms was reserved for those ranks of citizens who had a country to love, a property to defend, and some share in enacting those laws, which it was their interest as well as duty to maintain. But in proportion as the public freedom was lost in extent of conquest, war was gradually improved into an art, and degraded into a trade. <a href="#linknote-1.30" id="linknoteref-1.30" name="linknoteref-1.30">30</a> The legions themselves, even at the time when they were recruited in the most distant provinces, were supposed to consist of Roman citizens. That distinction was generally considered, either as a legal qualification or as a proper recompense for the soldier; but a more serious regard was paid to the essential merit of age, strength, and military stature. <a href="#linknote-1.31" id="linknoteref-1.31" name="linknoteref-1.31">31</a> In all levies, a just preference was given to the climates of the North over those of the South: the race of men born to the exercise of arms was sought for in the country rather than in cities; and it was very reasonably presumed, that the hardy occupations of smiths, carpenters, and huntsmen, would supply more vigor and resolution than the sedentary trades which are employed in the service of luxury. <a href="#linknote-1.32" id="linknoteref-1.32" name="linknoteref-1.32">32</a> After every qualification of property had been laid aside, the armies of the Roman emperors were still commanded, for the most part, by officers of liberal birth and education; but the common soldiers, like the mercenary troops of modern Europe, were drawn from the meanest, and very frequently from the most profligate, of mankind.</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.30" name="linknote-1.30">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">30 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.30">return</a>)<br/>
			[ The poorest rank of soldiers possessed above forty pounds sterling, (Dionys. Halicarn. iv. 17,) a very high qualification at a time when money was so scarce, that an ounce of silver was equivalent to seventy pounds weight of brass. The populace, excluded by the ancient constitution, were indiscriminately admitted by Marius. See Sallust. de Bell. Jugurth. c. 91. * Note: On the uncertainty of all these estimates, and the difficulty of fixing the relative value of brass and silver, compare Niebuhr, vol. i. p. 473, &amp;c. Eng. trans. p. 452. According to Niebuhr, the relative disproportion in value, between the two metals, arose, in a great degree from the abundance of brass or copper.⁠—M. Compare also Dureau de la Malle Economie Politique des Romains especially L. l. c. ix.⁠—M. 1845.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.31" name="linknote-1.31">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">31 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.31">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Cæsar formed his legion Alauda of Gauls and strangers; but it was during the license of civil war; and after the victory, he gave them the freedom of the city for their reward.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.32" name="linknote-1.32">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">32 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.32">return</a>)<br/>
			[ See Vegetius, de Re Militari, l. i. c. 2⁠—7.]</p>
			<p>That public virtue, which among the ancients was denominated patriotism, is derived from a strong sense of our own interest in the preservation and prosperity of the free government of which we are members. Such a sentiment, which had rendered the legions of the republic almost invincible, could make but a very feeble impression on the mercenary servants of a despotic prince; and it became necessary to supply that defect by other motives, of a different, but not less forcible nature⁠—honor and religion. The peasant, or mechanic, imbibed the useful prejudice that he was advanced to the more dignified profession of arms, in which his rank and reputation would depend on his own valor; and that, although the prowess of a private soldier must often escape the notice of fame, his own behavior might sometimes confer glory or disgrace on the company, the legion, or even the army, to whose honors he was associated. On his first entrance into the service, an oath was administered to him with every circumstance of solemnity. He promised never to desert his standard, to submit his own will to the commands of his leaders, and to sacrifice his life for the safety of the emperor and the empire. <a href="#linknote-1.33" id="linknoteref-1.33" name="linknoteref-1.33">33</a> The attachment of the Roman troops to their standards was inspired by the united influence of religion and of honor. The golden eagle, which glittered in the front of the legion, was the object of their fondest devotion; nor was it esteemed less impious than it was ignominious, to abandon that sacred ensign in the hour of danger. <a href="#linknote-1.34" id="linknoteref-1.34" name="linknoteref-1.34">34</a> These motives, which derived their strength from the imagination, were enforced by fears and hopes of a more substantial kind. Regular pay, occasional donatives, and a stated recompense, after the appointed time of service, alleviated the hardships of the military life, <a href="#linknote-1.35" id="linknoteref-1.35" name="linknoteref-1.35">35</a> whilst, on the other hand, it was impossible for cowardice or disobedience to escape the severest punishment. The centurions were authorized to chastise with blows, the generals had a right to punish with death; and it was an inflexible maxim of Roman discipline, that a good soldier should dread his officers far more than the enemy. From such laudable arts did the valor of the Imperial troops receive a degree of firmness and docility unattainable by the impetuous and irregular passions of barbarians.</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.33" name="linknote-1.33">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">33 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.33">return</a>)<br/>
			[ The oath of service and fidelity to the emperor was annually renewed by the troops on the first of January.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.34" name="linknote-1.34">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">34 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.34">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Tacitus calls the Roman eagles, Bellorum Deos. They were placed in a chapel in the camp, and with the other deities received the religious worship of the troops. * Note: See also Dio. Cass. xl. c. 18. —M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.35" name="linknote-1.35">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">35 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.35">return</a>)<br/>
			[ See Gronovius de Pecunia vetere, l. iii. p. 120, &amp;c. The emperor Domitian raised the annual stipend of the legionaries to twelve pieces of gold, which, in his time, was equivalent to about ten of our guineas. This pay, somewhat higher than our own, had been, and was afterwards, gradually increased, according to the progress of wealth and military government. After twenty years’ service, the veteran received three thousand denarii, (about one hundred pounds sterling,) or a proportionable allowance of land. The pay and advantages of the guards were, in general, about double those of the legions.]</p>
			<p>And yet so sensible were the Romans of the imperfection of valor without skill and practice, that, in their language, the name of an army was borrowed from the word which signified exercise. <a href="#linknote-1.36" id="linknoteref-1.36" name="linknoteref-1.36">36</a> Military exercises were the important and unremitted object of their discipline. The recruits and young soldiers were constantly trained, both in the morning and in the evening, nor was age or knowledge allowed to excuse the veterans from the daily repetition of what they had completely learnt. Large sheds were erected in the winter-quarters of the troops, that their useful labors might not receive any interruption from the most tempestuous weather; and it was carefully observed, that the arms destined to this imitation of war, should be of double the weight which was required in real action. <a href="#linknote-1.37" id="linknoteref-1.37" name="linknoteref-1.37">37</a> It is not the purpose of this work to enter into any minute description of the Roman exercises. We shall only remark, that they comprehended whatever could add strength to the body, activity to the limbs, or grace to the motions. The soldiers were diligently instructed to march, to run, to leap, to swim, to carry heavy burdens, to handle every species of arms that was used either for offence or for defence, either in distant engagement or in a closer onset; to form a variety of evolutions; and to move to the sound of flutes in the Pyrrhic or martial dance. <a href="#linknote-1.38" id="linknoteref-1.38" name="linknoteref-1.38">38</a> In the midst of peace, the Roman troops familiarized themselves with the practice of war; and it is prettily remarked by an ancient historian who had fought against them, that the effusion of blood was the only circumstance which distinguished a field of battle from a field of exercise. <a href="#linknote-1.39" id="linknoteref-1.39" name="linknoteref-1.39">39</a> It was the policy of the ablest generals, and even of the emperors themselves, to encourage these military studies by their presence and example; and we are informed that Hadrian, as well as Trajan, frequently condescended to instruct the unexperienced soldiers, to reward the diligent, and sometimes to dispute with them the prize of superior strength or dexterity. <a href="#linknote-1.40" id="linknoteref-1.40" name="linknoteref-1.40">40</a> Under the reigns of those princes, the science of tactics was cultivated with success; and as long as the empire retained any vigor, their military instructions were respected as the most perfect model of Roman discipline.</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.36" name="linknote-1.36">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">36 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.36">return</a>)<br/>
			[ <i>Exercitus ab exercitando</i>, Varro de Lingua Latina, l. iv. Cicero in Tusculan. l. ii. 37. 15. There is room for a very interesting work, which should lay open the connection between the languages and manners of nations. * Note I am not aware of the existence, at present, of such a work; but the profound observations of the late William von Humboldt, in the introduction to his posthumously published Essay on the Language of the Island of Java, (uber die Kawi-sprache, Berlin, 1836,) may cause regret that this task was not completed by that accomplished and universal scholar.⁠—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.37" name="linknote-1.37">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">37 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.37">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Vegatius, l. ii. and the rest of his first book.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.38" name="linknote-1.38">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">38 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.38">return</a>)<br/>
			[ The Pyrrhic dance is extremely well illustrated by M. le Beau, in the Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxxv. p. 262, &amp;c. That learned academician, in a series of memoirs, has collected all the passages of the ancients that relate to the Roman legion.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.39" name="linknote-1.39">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">39 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.39">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Joseph. de Bell. Judaico, l. iii. c. 5. We are indebted to this Jew for some very curious details of Roman discipline.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.40" name="linknote-1.40">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">40 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.40">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Plin. Panegyr. c. 13. Life of Hadrian, in the Augustan History.]</p>
			<p>Nine centuries of war had gradually introduced into the service many alterations and improvements. The legions, as they are described by Polybius, <a href="#linknote-1.41" id="linknoteref-1.41" name="linknoteref-1.41">41</a> in the time of the Punic wars, differed very materially from those which achieved the victories of Cæsar, or defended the monarchy of Hadrian and the Antonines. The constitution of the Imperial legion may be described in a few words. <a href="#linknote-1.42" id="linknoteref-1.42" name="linknoteref-1.42">42</a> The heavy-armed infantry, which composed its principal strength, <a href="#linknote-1.43" id="linknoteref-1.43" name="linknoteref-1.43">43</a> was divided into ten cohorts, and fifty-five companies, under the orders of a correspondent number of tribunes and centurions. The first cohort, which always claimed the post of honor and the custody of the eagle, was formed of eleven hundred and five soldiers, the most approved for valor and fidelity. The remaining nine cohorts consisted each of five hundred and fifty-five; and the whole body of legionary infantry amounted to six thousand one hundred men. Their arms were uniform, and admirably adapted to the nature of their service: an open helmet, with a lofty crest; a breastplate, or coat of mail; greaves on their legs, and an ample buckler on their left arm. The buckler was of an oblong and concave figure, four feet in length, and two and a half in breadth, framed of a light wood, covered with a bull’s hide, and strongly guarded with plates of brass. Besides a lighter spear, the legionary soldier grasped in his right hand the formidable <i>pilum</i>, a ponderous javelin, whose utmost length was about six feet, and which was terminated by a massy triangular point of steel of eighteen inches. <a href="#linknote-1.44" id="linknoteref-1.44" name="linknoteref-1.44">44</a> This instrument was indeed much inferior to our modern fire-arms; since it was exhausted by a single discharge, at the distance of only ten or twelve paces. Yet when it was launched by a firm and skilful hand, there was not any cavalry that durst venture within its reach, nor any shield or corselet that could sustain the impetuosity of its weight. As soon as the Roman had darted his <i>pilum</i>, he drew his sword, and rushed forwards to close with the enemy. His sword was a short well-tempered Spanish blade, that carried a double edge, and was alike suited to the purpose of striking or of pushing; but the soldier was always instructed to prefer the latter use of his weapon, as his own body remained less exposed, whilst he inflicted a more dangerous wound on his adversary. <a href="#linknote-1.45" id="linknoteref-1.45" name="linknoteref-1.45">45</a> The legion was usually drawn up eight deep; and the regular distance of three feet was left between the files as well as ranks. <a href="#linknote-1.46" id="linknoteref-1.46" name="linknoteref-1.46">46</a> A body of troops, habituated to preserve this open order, in a long front and a rapid charge, found themselves prepared to execute every disposition which the circumstances of war, or the skill of their leader, might suggest. The soldier possessed a free space for his arms and motions, and sufficient intervals were allowed, through which seasonable reinforcements might be introduced to the relief of the exhausted combatants. <a href="#linknote-1.47" id="linknoteref-1.47" name="linknoteref-1.47">47</a> The tactics of the Greeks and Macedonians were formed on very different principles. The strength of the phalanx depended on sixteen ranks of long pikes, wedged together in the closest array. <a href="#linknote-1.48" id="linknoteref-1.48" name="linknoteref-1.48">48</a> But it was soon discovered by reflection, as well as by the event, that the strength of the phalanx was unable to contend with the activity of the legion. <a href="#linknote-1.49" id="linknoteref-1.49" name="linknoteref-1.49">49</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.41" name="linknote-1.41">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">41 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.41">return</a>)<br/>
			[ See an admirable digression on the Roman discipline, in the sixth book of his History.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.42" name="linknote-1.42">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">42 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.42">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Vegetius de Re Militari, l. ii. c. 4, &amp;c. Considerable part of his very perplexed abridgment was taken from the regulations of Trajan and Hadrian; and the legion, as he describes it, cannot suit any other age of the Roman empire.] <a id="linknote-1.43" name="linknote-1.43"><!-- Note --></a></p>
			<p class="foot">43 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.43">return</a>)<br/>
			[Vegetius de Re Militari, l. ii. c. 1. In the purer age of Cæsar and Cicero, the word miles was almost confined to the infantry. Under the lower empire, and the times of chivalry, it was appropriated almost as exclusively to the men at arms, who fought on horseback.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.44" name="linknote-1.44">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">44 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.44">return</a>)<br/>
			[ In the time of Polybius and Dionysius of Halicarnassus, (l. v. c. 45,) the steel point of the pilum seems to have been much longer. In the time of Vegetius, it was reduced to a foot, or even nine inches. I have chosen a medium.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.45" name="linknote-1.45">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">45 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.45">return</a>)<br/>
			[ For the legionary arms, see Lipsius de Militia Romana, l. iii. c. 2⁠—7.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.46" name="linknote-1.46">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">46 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.46">return</a>)<br/>
			[ See the beautiful comparison of Virgil, Georgic ii. v. 279.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.47" name="linknote-1.47">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">47 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.47">return</a>)<br/>
			[ M. Guichard, Memoires Militaires, tom. i. c. 4, and Nouveaux Memoires, tom. i. p. 293⁠—311, has treated the subject like a scholar and an officer.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.48" name="linknote-1.48">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">48 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.48">return</a>)<br/>
			[ See Arrian’s Tactics. With the true partiality of a Greek, Arrian rather chose to describe the phalanx, of which he had read, than the legions which he had commanded.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.49" name="linknote-1.49">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">49 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.49">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Polyb. l. xvii. (xviii. 9.)]</p>
			<p>The cavalry, without which the force of the legion would have remained imperfect, was divided into ten troops or squadrons; the first, as the companion of the first cohort, consisted of a hundred and thirty-two men; whilst each of the other nine amounted only to sixty-six. The entire establishment formed a regiment, if we may use the modern expression, of seven hundred and twenty-six horse, naturally connected with its respective legion, but occasionally separated to act in the line, and to compose a part of the wings of the army. <a href="#linknote-1.50" id="linknoteref-1.50" name="linknoteref-1.50">50</a> The cavalry of the emperors was no longer composed, like that of the ancient republic, of the noblest youths of Rome and Italy, who, by performing their military service on horseback, prepared themselves for the offices of senator and consul; and solicited, by deeds of valor, the future suffrages of their countrymen. <a href="#linknote-1.51" id="linknoteref-1.51" name="linknoteref-1.51">51</a> Since the alteration of manners and government, the most wealthy of the equestrian order were engaged in the administration of justice, and of the revenue; <a href="#linknote-1.52" id="linknoteref-1.52" name="linknoteref-1.52">52</a> and whenever they embraced the profession of arms, they were immediately intrusted with a troop of horse, or a cohort of foot. <a href="#linknote-1.53" id="linknoteref-1.53" name="linknoteref-1.53">53</a> Trajan and Hadrian formed their cavalry from the same provinces, and the same class of their subjects, which recruited the ranks of the legion. The horses were bred, for the most part, in Spain or Cappadocia. The Roman troopers despised the complete armor with which the cavalry of the East was encumbered. <i>Their</i> more useful arms consisted in a helmet, an oblong shield, light boots, and a coat of mail. A javelin, and a long broad sword, were their principal weapons of offence. The use of lances and of iron maces they seem to have borrowed from the barbarians. <a href="#linknote-1.54" id="linknoteref-1.54" name="linknoteref-1.54">54</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.50" name="linknote-1.50">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">50 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.50">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Veget. de Re Militari, l. ii. c. 6. His positive testimony, which might be supported by circumstantial evidence, ought surely to silence those critics who refuse the Imperial legion its proper body of cavalry. Note: See also Joseph. B. J. iii. vi. 2.⁠—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.51" name="linknote-1.51">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">51 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.51">return</a>)<br/>
			[ See Livy almost throughout, particularly xlii. 61.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.52" name="linknote-1.52">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">52 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.52">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Plin. Hist. Natur. xxxiii. 2. The true sense of that very curious passage was first discovered and illustrated by M. de Beaufort, Republique Romaine, l. ii. c. 2.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.53" name="linknote-1.53">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">53 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.53">return</a>)<br/>
			[ As in the instance of Horace and Agricola. This appears to have been a defect in the Roman discipline; which Hadrian endeavored to remedy by ascertaining the legal age of a tribune. * Note: These details are not altogether accurate. Although, in the latter days of the republic, and under the first emperors, the young Roman nobles obtained the command of a squadron or a cohort with greater facility than in the former times, they never obtained it without passing through a tolerably long military service. Usually they served first in the prætorian cohort, which was intrusted with the guard of the general: they were received into the companionship (contubernium) of some superior officer, and were there formed for duty. Thus Julius Cæsar, though sprung from a great family, served first as contubernalis under the prætor, M. Thermus, and later under Servilius the Isaurian. (Suet. Jul. 2, 5. Plut. in Par. p. 516. Ed. Froben.) The example of Horace, which Gibbon adduces to prove that young knights were made tribunes immediately on entering the service, proves nothing. In the first place, Horace was not a knight; he was the son of a freedman of Venusia, in Apulia, who exercised the humble office of coactor exauctionum, (collector of payments at auctions.) (Sat. i. vi. 45, or 86.) Moreover, when the poet was made tribune, Brutus, whose army was nearly entirely composed of Orientals, gave this title to all the Romans of consideration who joined him. The emperors were still less difficult in their choice; the number of tribunes was augmented; the title and honors were conferred on persons whom they wished to attack to the court. Augustus conferred on the sons of senators, sometimes the tribunate, sometimes the command of a squadron. Claudius gave to the knights who entered into the service, first the command of a cohort of auxiliaries, later that of a squadron, and at length, for the first time, the tribunate. (Suet in Claud. with the notes of Ernesti.) The abuses that arose caused by the edict of Hadrian, which fixed the age at which that honor could be attained. (Spart. in Had. &amp;c.) This edict was subsequently obeyed; for the emperor Valerian, in a letter addressed to Mulvius Gallinnus, prætorian præfect, excuses himself for having violated it in favor of the young Probus afterwards emperor, on whom he had conferred the tribunate at an earlier age on account of his rare talents. (Vopisc. in Prob. iv.)⁠—W. and G. Agricola, though already invested with the title of tribune, was contubernalis in Britain with Suetonius Paulinus. Tac. Agr. v.⁠—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.54" name="linknote-1.54">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">54 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.54">return</a>)<br/>
			[ See Arrian’s Tactics.]</p>
			<p>The safety and honor of the empire was principally intrusted to the legions, but the policy of Rome condescended to adopt every useful instrument of war. Considerable levies were regularly made among the provincials, who had not yet deserved the honorable distinction of Romans. Many dependent princes and communities, dispersed round the frontiers, were permitted, for a while, to hold their freedom and security by the tenure of military service. <a href="#linknote-1.55" id="linknoteref-1.55" name="linknoteref-1.55">55</a> Even select troops of hostile barbarians were frequently compelled or persuaded to consume their dangerous valor in remote climates, and for the benefit of the state. <a href="#linknote-1.56" id="linknoteref-1.56" name="linknoteref-1.56">56</a> All these were included under the general name of auxiliaries; and howsoever they might vary according to the difference of times and circumstances, their numbers were seldom much inferior to those of the legions themselves. <a href="#linknote-1.57" id="linknoteref-1.57" name="linknoteref-1.57">57</a> Among the auxiliaries, the bravest and most faithful bands were placed under the command of præfects and centurions, and severely trained in the arts of Roman discipline; but the far greater part retained those arms, to which the nature of their country, or their early habits of life, more peculiarly adapted them. By this institution, each legion, to whom a certain proportion of auxiliaries was allotted, contained within itself every species of lighter troops, and of missile weapons; and was capable of encountering every nation, with the advantages of its respective arms and discipline. <a href="#linknote-1.58" id="linknoteref-1.58" name="linknoteref-1.58">58</a> Nor was the legion destitute of what, in modern language, would be styled a train of artillery. It consisted in ten military engines of the largest, and fifty-five of a smaller size; but all of which, either in an oblique or horizontal manner, discharged stones and darts with irresistible violence. <a href="#linknote-1.59" id="linknoteref-1.59" name="linknoteref-1.59">59</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.55" name="linknote-1.55">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">55 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.55">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Such, in particular, was the state of the Batavians. Tacit. Germania, c. 29.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.56" name="linknote-1.56">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">56 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.56">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Marcus Antoninus obliged the vanquished Quadi and Marcomanni to supply him with a large body of troops, which he immediately sent into Britain. Dion Cassius, l. lxxi. (c. 16.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.57" name="linknote-1.57">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">57 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.57">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Tacit. Annal. iv. 5. Those who fix a regular proportion of as many foot, and twice as many horse, confound the auxiliaries of the emperors with the Italian allies of the republic.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.58" name="linknote-1.58">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">58 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.58">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Vegetius, ii. 2. Arrian, in his order of march and battle against the Alani.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.59" name="linknote-1.59">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">59 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.59">return</a>)<br/>
			[ The subject of the ancient machines is treated with great knowledge and ingenuity by the Chevalier Folard, (Polybe, tom. ii. p. 233⁠–⁠290.) He prefers them in many respects to our modern cannon and mortars. We may observe, that the use of them in the field gradually became more prevalent, in proportion as personal valor and military skill declined with the Roman empire. When men were no longer found, their place was supplied by machines. See Vegetius, ii. 25. Arrian.]</p>
			<h2><a id="chap01.3" name="chap01.3"/> Chapter I: The Extent Of The Empire In The Age Of The Antonines.⁠—Part III.</h2>
			<p>The camp of a Roman legion presented the appearance of a fortified city. <a href="#linknote-1.60" id="linknoteref-1.60" name="linknoteref-1.60">60</a> As soon as the space was marked out, the pioneers carefully levelled the ground, and removed every impediment that might interrupt its perfect regularity. Its form was an exact quadrangle; and we may calculate, that a square of about seven hundred yards was sufficient for the encampment of twenty thousand Romans; though a similar number of our own troops would expose to the enemy a front of more than treble that extent. In the midst of the camp, the prætorium, or general’s quarters, rose above the others; the cavalry, the infantry, and the auxiliaries occupied their respective stations; the streets were broad and perfectly straight, and a vacant space of two hundred feet was left on all sides between the tents and the rampart. The rampart itself was usually twelve feet high, armed with a line of strong and intricate palisades, and defended by a ditch of twelve feet in depth as well as in breadth. This important labor was performed by the hands of the legionaries themselves; to whom the use of the spade and the pickaxe was no less familiar than that of the sword or <i>pilum</i>. Active valor may often be the present of nature; but such patient diligence can be the fruit only of habit and discipline. <a href="#linknote-1.61" id="linknoteref-1.61" name="linknoteref-1.61">61</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.60" name="linknote-1.60">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">60 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.60">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Vegetius finishes his second book, and the description of the legion, with the following emphatic words:⁠—“Universa quæ in quoque belli genere necessaria esse creduntur, secum legio debet ubique portare, ut in quovis loco fixerit castra, armatam faciat civitatem.”]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.61" name="linknote-1.61">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">61 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.61">return</a>)<br/>
			[ For the Roman Castrametation, see Polybius, l. vi. with Lipsius de Militia Romana, Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. iii. c. 5. Vegetius, i. 21⁠—25, iii. 9, and Memoires de Guichard, tom. i. c. 1.]</p>
			<p>Whenever the trumpet gave the signal of departure, the camp was almost instantly broke up, and the troops fell into their ranks without delay or confusion. Besides their arms, which the legionaries scarcely considered as an encumbrance, they were laden with their kitchen furniture, the instruments of fortification, and the provision of many days. <a href="#linknote-1.62" id="linknoteref-1.62" name="linknoteref-1.62">62</a> Under this weight, which would oppress the delicacy of a modern soldier, they were trained by a regular step to advance, in about six hours, near twenty miles. <a href="#linknote-1.63" id="linknoteref-1.63" name="linknoteref-1.63">63</a> On the appearance of an enemy, they threw aside their baggage, and by easy and rapid evolutions converted the column of march into an order of battle. <a href="#linknote-1.64" id="linknoteref-1.64" name="linknoteref-1.64">64</a> The slingers and archers skirmished in the front; the auxiliaries formed the first line, and were seconded or sustained by the strength of the legions; the cavalry covered the flanks, and the military engines were placed in the rear.</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.62" name="linknote-1.62">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">62 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.62">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Cicero in Tusculan. ii. 37, [15.]⁠—Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. iii. 5, Frontinus, iv. 1.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.63" name="linknote-1.63">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">63 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.63">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Vegetius, i. 9. See Memoires de l’Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxv. p. 187.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.64" name="linknote-1.64">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">64 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.64">return</a>)<br/>
			[ See those evolutions admirably well explained by M. Guichard Nouveaux Memoires, tom. i. p. 141⁠—234.]</p>
			<p>Such were the arts of war, by which the Roman emperors defended their extensive conquests, and preserved a military spirit, at a time when every other virtue was oppressed by luxury and despotism. If, in the consideration of their armies, we pass from their discipline to their numbers, we shall not find it easy to define them with any tolerable accuracy. We may compute, however, that the legion, which was itself a body of six thousand eight hundred and thirty-one Romans, might, with its attendant auxiliaries, amount to about twelve thousand five hundred men. The peace establishment of Hadrian and his successors was composed of no less than thirty of these formidable brigades; and most probably formed a standing force of three hundred and seventy-five thousand men. Instead of being confined within the walls of fortified cities, which the Romans considered as the refuge of weakness or pusillanimity, the legions were encamped on the banks of the great rivers, and along the frontiers of the barbarians. As their stations, for the most part, remained fixed and permanent, we may venture to describe the distribution of the troops. Three legions were sufficient for Britain. The principal strength lay upon the Rhine and Danube, and consisted of sixteen legions, in the following proportions: two in the Lower, and three in the Upper Germany; one in Rhætia, one in Noricum, four in Pannonia, three in Mæsia, and two in Dacia. The defence of the Euphrates was intrusted to eight legions, six of whom were planted in Syria, and the other two in Cappadocia. With regard to Egypt, Africa, and Spain, as they were far removed from any important scene of war, a single legion maintained the domestic tranquillity of each of those great provinces. Even Italy was not left destitute of a military force. Above twenty thousand chosen soldiers, distinguished by the titles of City Cohorts and Prætorian Guards, watched over the safety of the monarch and the capital. As the authors of almost every revolution that distracted the empire, the Prætorians will, very soon, and very loudly, demand our attention; but, in their arms and institutions, we cannot find any circumstance which discriminated them from the legions, unless it were a more splendid appearance, and a less rigid discipline. <a href="#linknote-1.65" id="linknoteref-1.65" name="linknoteref-1.65">65</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.65" name="linknote-1.65">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">65 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.65">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Tacitus (Annal. iv. 5) has given us a state of the legions under Tiberius; and Dion Cassius (l. lv. p. 794) under Alexander Severus. I have endeavored to fix on the proper medium between these two periods. See likewise Lipsius de Magnitudine Romana, l. i. c. 4, 5.]</p>
			<p>The navy maintained by the emperors might seem inadequate to their greatness; but it was fully sufficient for every useful purpose of government. The ambition of the Romans was confined to the land; nor was that warlike people ever actuated by the enterprising spirit which had prompted the navigators of Tyre, of Carthage, and even of Marseilles, to enlarge the bounds of the world, and to explore the most remote coasts of the ocean. To the Romans the ocean remained an object of terror rather than of curiosity; <a href="#linknote-1.66" id="linknoteref-1.66" name="linknoteref-1.66">66</a> the whole extent of the Mediterranean, after the destruction of Carthage, and the extirpation of the pirates, was included within their provinces. The policy of the emperors was directed only to preserve the peaceful dominion of that sea, and to protect the commerce of their subjects. With these moderate views, Augustus stationed two permanent fleets in the most convenient ports of Italy, the one at Ravenna, on the Adriatic, the other at Misenum, in the Bay of Naples. Experience seems at length to have convinced the ancients, that as soon as their galleys exceeded two, or at the most three ranks of oars, they were suited rather for vain pomp than for real service. Augustus himself, in the victory of Actium, had seen the superiority of his own light frigates (they were called Liburnians) over the lofty but unwieldy castles of his rival. <a href="#linknote-1.67" id="linknoteref-1.67" name="linknoteref-1.67">67</a> Of these Liburnians he composed the two fleets of Ravenna and Misenum, destined to command, the one the eastern, the other the western division of the Mediterranean; and to each of the squadrons he attached a body of several thousand marines. Besides these two ports, which may be considered as the principal seats of the Roman navy, a very considerable force was stationed at Frejus, on the coast of Provence, and the Euxine was guarded by forty ships, and three thousand soldiers. To all these we add the fleet which preserved the communication between Gaul and Britain, and a great number of vessels constantly maintained on the Rhine and Danube, to harass the country, or to intercept the passage of the barbarians. <a href="#linknote-1.68" id="linknoteref-1.68" name="linknoteref-1.68">68</a> If we review this general state of the Imperial forces; of the cavalry as well as infantry; of the legions, the auxiliaries, the guards, and the navy; the most liberal computation will not allow us to fix the entire establishment by sea and by land at more than four hundred and fifty thousand men: a military power, which, however formidable it may seem, was equalled by a monarch of the last century, whose kingdom was confined within a single province of the Roman empire. <a href="#linknote-1.69" id="linknoteref-1.69" name="linknoteref-1.69">69</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.66" name="linknote-1.66">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">66 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.66">return</a>)<br/>
			[ The Romans tried to disguise, by the pretence of religious awe their ignorance and terror. See Tacit. Germania, c. 34.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.67" name="linknote-1.67">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">67 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.67">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Plutarch, in Marc. Anton. [c. 67.] And yet, if we may credit Orosius, these monstrous castles were no more than ten feet above the water, vi. 19.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.68" name="linknote-1.68">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">68 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.68">return</a>)<br/>
			[ See Lipsius, de Magnitud. Rom. l. i. c. 5. The sixteen last chapters of Vegetius relate to naval affairs.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.69" name="linknote-1.69">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">69 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.69">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Voltaire, Siecle de Louis XIV. c. 29. It must, however, be remembered, that France still feels that extraordinary effort.]</p>
			<p>We have attempted to explain the spirit which moderated, and the strength which supported, the power of Hadrian and the Antonines. We shall now endeavor, with clearness and precision, to describe the provinces once united under their sway, but, at present, divided into so many independent and hostile states. Spain, the western extremity of the empire, of Europe, and of the ancient world, has, in every age, invariably preserved the same natural limits; the Pyrenæan Mountains, the Mediterranean, and the Atlantic Ocean. That great peninsula, at present so unequally divided between two sovereigns, was distributed by Augustus into three provinces, Lusitania, Bætica, and Tarraconensis. The kingdom of Portugal now fills the place of the warlike country of the Lusitanians; and the loss sustained by the former on the side of the East, is compensated by an accession of territory towards the North. The confines of Grenada and Andalusia correspond with those of ancient Bætica. The remainder of Spain, Gallicia, and the Asturias, Biscay, and Navarre, Leon, and the two Castiles, Murcia, Valencia, Catalonia, and Arragon, all contributed to form the third and most considerable of the Roman governments, which, from the name of its capital, was styled the province of Tarragona. <a href="#linknote-1.70" id="linknoteref-1.70" name="linknoteref-1.70">70</a> Of the native barbarians, the Celtiberians were the most powerful, as the Cantabrians and Asturians proved the most obstinate. Confident in the strength of their mountains, they were the last who submitted to the arms of Rome, and the first who threw off the yoke of the Arabs.</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.70" name="linknote-1.70">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">70 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.70">return</a>)<br/>
			[ See Strabo, l. ii. It is natural enough to suppose, that Arragon is derived from Tarraconensis, and several moderns who have written in Latin use those words as synonymous. It is, however, certain, that the Arragon, a little stream which falls from the Pyrenees into the Ebro, first gave its name to a country, and gradually to a kingdom. See d’Anville, Geographie du Moyen Age, p. 181.]</p>
			<p>Ancient Gaul, as it contained the whole country between the Pyrenees, the Alps, the Rhine, and the Ocean, was of greater extent than modern France. To the dominions of that powerful monarchy, with its recent acquisitions of Alsace and Lorraine, we must add the duchy of Savoy, the cantons of Switzerland, the four electorates of the Rhine, and the territories of Liege, Luxemburgh, Hainault, Flanders, and Brabant. When Augustus gave laws to the conquests of his father, he introduced a division of Gaul, equally adapted to the progress of the legions, to the course of the rivers, and to the principal national distinctions, which had comprehended above a hundred independent states. <a href="#linknote-1.71" id="linknoteref-1.71" name="linknoteref-1.71">71</a> The sea-coast of the Mediterranean, Languedoc, Provence, and Dauphiné, received their provincial appellation from the colony of Narbonne. The government of Aquitaine was extended from the Pyrenees to the Loire. The country between the Loire and the Seine was styled the Celtic Gaul, and soon borrowed a new denomination from the celebrated colony of Lugdunum, or Lyons. The Belgic lay beyond the Seine, and in more ancient times had been bounded only by the Rhine; but a little before the age of Cæsar, the Germans, abusing their superiority of valor, had occupied a considerable portion of the Belgic territory. The Roman conquerors very eagerly embraced so flattering a circumstance, and the Gallic frontier of the Rhine, from Basil to Leyden, received the pompous names of the Upper and the Lower Germany. <a href="#linknote-1.72" id="linknoteref-1.72" name="linknoteref-1.72">72</a> Such, under the reign of the Antonines, were the six provinces of Gaul; the Narbonnese, Aquitaine, the Celtic, or Lyonnese, the Belgic, and the two Germanies.</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.71" name="linknote-1.71">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">71 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.71">return</a>)<br/>
			[ One hundred and fifteen <i>cities</i> appear in the Notitia of Gaul; and it is well known that this appellation was applied not only to the capital town, but to the whole territory of each state. But Plutarch and Appian increase the number of tribes to three or four hundred.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.72" name="linknote-1.72">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">72 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.72">return</a>)<br/>
			[ D’Anville. Notice de l’Ancienne Gaule.]</p>
			<p>We have already had occasion to mention the conquest of Britain, and to fix the boundary of the Roman Province in this island. It comprehended all England, Wales, and the Lowlands of Scotland, as far as the Friths of Dumbarton and Edinburgh. Before Britain lost her freedom, the country was irregularly divided between thirty tribes of barbarians, of whom the most considerable were the Belgæ in the West, the Brigantes in the North, the Silures in South Wales, and the Iceni in Norfolk and Suffolk. <a href="#linknote-1.73" id="linknoteref-1.73" name="linknoteref-1.73">73</a> As far as we can either trace or credit the resemblance of manners and language, Spain, Gaul, and Britain were peopled by the same hardy race of savages. Before they yielded to the Roman arms, they often disputed the field, and often renewed the contest. After their submission, they constituted the western division of the European provinces, which extended from the columns of Hercules to the wall of Antoninus, and from the mouth of the Tagus to the sources of the Rhine and Danube.</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.73" name="linknote-1.73">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">73 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.73">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Whittaker’s History of Manchester, vol. i. c. 3.] Before the Roman conquest, the country which is now called Lombardy, was not considered as a part of Italy. It had been occupied by a powerful colony of Gauls, who, settling themselves along the banks of the Po, from Piedmont to Romagna, carried their arms and diffused their name from the Alps to the Apennine.</p>
			<p>The Ligurians dwelt on the rocky coast which now forms the republic of Genoa. Venice was yet unborn; but the territories of that state, which lie to the east of the Adige, were inhabited by the Venetians. <a href="#linknote-1.74" id="linknoteref-1.74" name="linknoteref-1.74">74</a> The middle part of the peninsula, that now composes the duchy of Tuscany and the ecclesiastical state, was the ancient seat of the Etruscans and Umbrians; to the former of whom Italy was indebted for the first rudiments of civilized life. <a href="#linknote-1.75" id="linknoteref-1.75" name="linknoteref-1.75">75</a> The Tyber rolled at the foot of the seven hills of Rome, and the country of the Sabines, the Latins, and the Volsci, from that river to the frontiers of Naples, was the theatre of her infant victories. On that celebrated ground the first consuls deserved triumphs, their successors adorned villas, and <i>their</i> posterity have erected convents. <a href="#linknote-1.76" id="linknoteref-1.76" name="linknoteref-1.76">76</a> Capua and Campania possessed the immediate territory of Naples; the rest of the kingdom was inhabited by many warlike nations, the Marsi, the Samnites, the Apulians, and the Lucanians; and the sea-coasts had been covered by the flourishing colonies of the Greeks. We may remark, that when Augustus divided Italy into eleven regions, the little province of Istria was annexed to that seat of Roman sovereignty. <a href="#linknote-1.77" id="linknoteref-1.77" name="linknoteref-1.77">77</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.74" name="linknote-1.74">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">74 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.74">return</a>)<br/>
			[ The Italian Veneti, though often confounded with the Gauls, were more probably of Illyrian origin. See M. Freret, Mémoires de l’Académie des Inscriptions, tom. xviii. * Note: Or Liburnian, according to Niebuhr. Vol. i. p. 172.⁠—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.75" name="linknote-1.75">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">75 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.75">return</a>)<br/>
			[ See Maffei Verona illustrata, l. i. * Note: Add Niebuhr, vol. i., and Otfried Müller, <i>die Etrusker</i>, which contains much that is known, and much that is conjectured, about this remarkable people. Also Micali, Storia degli antichi popoli Italiani. Florence, 1832⁠—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.76" name="linknote-1.76">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">76 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.76">return</a>)<br/>
			[ The first contrast was observed by the ancients. See Florus, i. 11. The second must strike every modern traveller.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.77" name="linknote-1.77">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">77 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.77">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Pliny (Hist. Natur. l. iii.) follows the division of Italy by Augustus.]</p>
			<p>The European provinces of Rome were protected by the course of the Rhine and the Danube. The latter of those mighty streams, which rises at the distance of only thirty miles from the former, flows above thirteen hundred miles, for the most part to the south-east, collects the tribute of sixty navigable rivers, and is, at length, through six mouths, received into the Euxine, which appears scarcely equal to such an accession of waters. <a href="#linknote-1.78" id="linknoteref-1.78" name="linknoteref-1.78">78</a> The provinces of the Danube soon acquired the general appellation of Illyricum, or the Illyrian frontier, <a href="#linknote-1.79" id="linknoteref-1.79" name="linknoteref-1.79">79</a> and were esteemed the most warlike of the empire; but they deserve to be more particularly considered under the names of Rhætia, Noricum, Pannonia, Dalmatia, Dacia, Mæsia, Thrace, Macedonia, and Greece.</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.78" name="linknote-1.78">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">78 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.78">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Tournefort, Voyages en Grece et Asie Mineure, lettre xviii.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.79" name="linknote-1.79">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">79 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.79">return</a>)<br/>
			[ The name of Illyricum originally belonged to the sea-coast of the Adriatic, and was gradually extended by the Romans from the Alps to the Euxine Sea. See Severini Pannonia, l. i. c. 3.]</p>
			<p>The province of Rhætia, which soon extinguished the name of the Vindelicians, extended from the summit of the Alps to the banks of the Danube; from its source, as far as its conflux with the Inn. The greatest part of the flat country is subject to the elector of Bavaria; the city of Augsburg is protected by the constitution of the German empire; the Grisons are safe in their mountains, and the country of Tirol is ranked among the numerous provinces of the house of Austria.</p>
			<p>The wide extent of territory which is included between the Inn, the Danube, and the Save⁠—Austria, Styria, Carinthia, Carniola, the Lower Hungary, and Sclavonia⁠—was known to the ancients under the names of Noricum and Pannonia. In their original state of independence, their fierce inhabitants were intimately connected. Under the Roman government they were frequently united, and they still remain the patrimony of a single family. They now contain the residence of a German prince, who styles himself Emperor of the Romans, and form the centre, as well as strength, of the Austrian power. It may not be improper to observe, that if we except Bohemia, Moravia, the northern skirts of Austria, and a part of Hungary between the Teyss and the Danube, all the other dominions of the House of Austria were comprised within the limits of the Roman Empire.</p>
			<p>Dalmatia, to which the name of Illyricum more properly belonged, was a long, but narrow tract, between the Save and the Adriatic. The best part of the sea-coast, which still retains its ancient appellation, is a province of the Venetian state, and the seat of the little republic of Ragusa. The inland parts have assumed the Sclavonian names of Croatia and Bosnia; the former obeys an Austrian governor, the latter a Turkish pacha; but the whole country is still infested by tribes of barbarians, whose savage independence irregularly marks the doubtful limit of the Christian and Mahometan power. <a href="#linknote-1.80" id="linknoteref-1.80" name="linknoteref-1.80">80</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.80" name="linknote-1.80">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">80 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.80">return</a>)<br/>
			[ A Venetian traveller, the Abbate Fortis, has lately given us some account of those very obscure countries. But the geography and antiquities of the western Illyricum can be expected only from the munificence of the emperor, its sovereign.]</p>
			<p>After the Danube had received the waters of the Teyss and the Save, it acquired, at least among the Greeks, the name of Ister. <a href="#linknote-1.81" id="linknoteref-1.81" name="linknoteref-1.81">81</a> It formerly divided Mæsia and Dacia, the latter of which, as we have already seen, was a conquest of Trajan, and the only province beyond the river. If we inquire into the present state of those countries, we shall find that, on the left hand of the Danube, Temeswar and Transylvania have been annexed, after many revolutions, to the crown of Hungary; whilst the principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia acknowledge the supremacy of the Ottoman Porte. On the right hand of the Danube, Mæsia, which, during the middle ages, was broken into the barbarian kingdoms of Servia and Bulgaria, is again united in Turkish slavery.</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.81" name="linknote-1.81">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">81 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.81">return</a>)<br/>
			[ The Save rises near the confines of <i>Istria</i>, and was considered by the more early Greeks as the principal stream of the Danube.]</p>
			<p>The appellation of Roumelia, which is still bestowed by the Turks on the extensive countries of Thrace, Macedonia, and Greece, preserves the memory of their ancient state under the Roman empire. In the time of the Antonines, the martial regions of Thrace, from the mountains of Hæmus and Rhodope, to the Bosphorus and the Hellespont, had assumed the form of a province. Notwithstanding the change of masters and of religion, the new city of Rome, founded by Constantine on the banks of the Bosphorus, has ever since remained the capital of a great monarchy. The kingdom of Macedonia, which, under the reign of Alexander, gave laws to Asia, derived more solid advantages from the policy of the two Philips; and with its dependencies of Epirus and Thessaly, extended from the Ægean to the Ionian Sea. When we reflect on the fame of Thebes and Argos, of Sparta and Athens, we can scarcely persuade ourselves, that so many immortal republics of ancient Greece were lost in a single province of the Roman empire, which, from the superior influence of the Achæan league, was usually denominated the province of Achaia.</p>
			<p>Such was the state of Europe under the Roman emperors. The provinces of Asia, without excepting the transient conquests of Trajan, are all comprehended within the limits of the Turkish power. But, instead of following the arbitrary divisions of despotism and ignorance, it will be safer for us, as well as more agreeable, to observe the indelible characters of nature. The name of Asia Minor is attributed with some propriety to the peninsula, which, confined betwixt the Euxine and the Mediterranean, advances from the Euphrates towards Europe. The most extensive and flourishing district, westward of Mount Taurus and the River Halys, was dignified by the Romans with the exclusive title of Asia. The jurisdiction of that province extended over the ancient monarchies of Troy, Lydia, and Phrygia, the maritime countries of the Pamphylians, Lycians, and Carians, and the Grecian colonies of Ionia, which equalled in arts, though not in arms, the glory of their parent. The kingdoms of Bithynia and Pontus possessed the northern side of the peninsula from Constantinople to Trebizond. On the opposite side, the province of Cilicia was terminated by the mountains of Syria: the inland country, separated from the Roman Asia by the River Halys, and from Armenia by the Euphrates, had once formed the independent kingdom of Cappadocia. In this place we may observe, that the northern shores of the Euxine, beyond Trebizond in Asia, and beyond the Danube in Europe, acknowledged the sovereignty of the emperors, and received at their hands either tributary princes or Roman garrisons. Budzak, Crim Tartary, Circassia, and Mingrelia, are the modern appellations of those savage countries. <a href="#linknote-1.82" id="linknoteref-1.82" name="linknoteref-1.82">82</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.82" name="linknote-1.82">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">82 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.82">return</a>)<br/>
			[ See the Periplus of Arrian. He examined the coasts of the Euxine, when he was governor of Cappadocia.]</p>
			<p>Under the successors of Alexander, Syria was the seat of the Seleucidæ, who reigned over Upper Asia, till the successful revolt of the Parthians confined their dominions between the Euphrates and the Mediterranean. When Syria became subject to the Romans, it formed the eastern frontier of their empire: nor did that province, in its utmost latitude, know any other bounds than the mountains of Cappadocia to the north, and towards the south, the confines of Egypt, and the Red Sea. Phœnicia and Palestine were sometimes annexed to, and sometimes separated from, the jurisdiction of Syria. The former of these was a narrow and rocky coast; the latter was a territory scarcely superior to Wales, either in fertility or extent. <a href="#linknote-1.821" id="linknoteref-1.821" name="linknoteref-1.821">821</a> Yet Phœnicia and Palestine will forever live in the memory of mankind; since America, as well as Europe, has received letters from the one, and religion from the other. <a href="#linknote-1.83" id="linknoteref-1.83" name="linknoteref-1.83">83</a> A sandy desert, alike destitute of wood and water, skirts along the doubtful confine of Syria, from the Euphrates to the Red Sea. The wandering life of the Arabs was inseparably connected with their independence; and wherever, on some spots less barren than the rest, they ventured to for many settled habitations, they soon became subjects to the Roman empire. <a href="#linknote-1.84" id="linknoteref-1.84" name="linknoteref-1.84">84</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.821" name="linknote-1.821">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">821 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.821">return</a>)<br/>
			[ This comparison is exaggerated, with the intention, no doubt, of attacking the authority of the Bible, which boasts of the fertility of Palestine. Gibbon’s only authorities were that of Strabo (l. xvi. 1104) and the present state of the country. But Strabo only speaks of the neighborhood of Jerusalem, which he calls barren and arid to the extent of sixty stadia round the city: in other parts he gives a favorable testimony to the fertility of many parts of Palestine: thus he says, “Near Jericho there is a grove of palms, and a country of a hundred stadia, full of springs, and well peopled.” Moreover, Strabo had never seen Palestine; he spoke only after reports, which may be as inaccurate as those according to which he has composed that description of Germany, in which Gluverius has detected so many errors. (Gluv. Germ. iii. 1.) Finally, his testimony is contradicted and refuted by that of other ancient authors, and by medals. Tacitus says, in speaking of Palestine, “The inhabitants are healthy and robust; the rains moderate; the soil fertile.” (Hist. v. 6.) Ammianus Macellinus says also, “The last of the Syrias is Palestine, a country of considerable extent, abounding in clean and well-cultivated land, and containing some fine cities, none of which yields to the other; but, as it were, being on a parallel, are rivals.”⁠—xiv. 8. See also the historian Josephus, Hist. vi. 1. Procopius of Cæserea, who lived in the sixth century, says that Chosroes, king of Persia, had a great desire to make himself master of Palestine, <i>on account of its</i> extraordinary fertility, its opulence, and the great number of its inhabitants. The Saracens thought the same, and were afraid that Omar. when he went to Jerusalem, charmed with the fertility of the soil and the purity of the air, would never return to Medina. (Ockley, Hist. of Sarac. i. 232.) The importance attached by the Romans to the conquest of Palestine, and the obstacles they encountered, prove also the richness and population of the country. Vespasian and Titus caused medals to be struck with trophies, in which Palestine is represented by a female under a palm-tree, to signify the richness of he country, with this legend: <i>Judæa capta</i>. Other medals also indicate this fertility; for instance, that of Herod holding a bunch of grapes, and that of the young Agrippa displaying fruit. As to the present state of he country, one perceives that it is not fair to draw any inference against its ancient fertility: the disasters through which it has passed, the government to which it is subject, the disposition of the inhabitants, explain sufficiently the wild and uncultivated appearance of the land, where, nevertheless, fertile and cultivated districts are still found, according to the testimony of travellers; among others, of Shaw, Maundrel, La Rocque, &amp;c.⁠—G. The Abbé Guénée, in his <i>Lettres de quelques Juifs Ã Mons. de Voltaire</i>, has exhausted the subject of the fertility of Palestine; for Voltaire had likewise indulged in sarcasm on this subject. Gibbon was assailed on this point, not, indeed, by Mr. Davis, who, he slyly insinuates, was prevented by his patriotism as a Welshman from resenting the comparison with Wales, but by other writers. In his Vindication, he first established the correctness of his measurement of Palestine, which he estimates as 7600 square English miles, while Wales is about 7011. As to fertility, he proceeds in the following dexterously composed and splendid passage: “The emperor Frederick II., the enemy and the victim of the clergy, is accused of saying, after his return from his crusade, that the God of the Jews would have despised his promised land, if he had once seen the fruitful realms of Sicily and Naples.” (See Giannone, Istor. Civ. del R. di Napoli, ii. 245.) This raillery, which malice has, perhaps, falsely imputed to Frederick, is inconsistent with truth and piety; yet it must be confessed that the soil of Palestine does not contain that inexhaustible, and, as it were, spontaneous principle of fertility, which, under the most unfavorable circumstances, has covered with rich harvests the banks of the Nile, the fields of Sicily, or the plains of Poland. The Jordan is the only navigable river of Palestine: a considerable part of the narrow space is occupied, or rather lost, in the <i>Dead Sea</i> whose horrid aspect inspires every sensation of disgust, and countenances every tale of horror. The districts which border on Arabia partake of the sandy quality of the adjacent desert. The face of the country, except the sea-coast, and the valley of the Jordan, is covered with mountains, which appear, for the most part, as naked and barren rocks; and in the neighborhood of Jerusalem, there is a real scarcity of the two elements of earth and water. (See Maundrel’s Travels, p. 65, and Reland’s Palestin. i. 238, 395.) These disadvantages, which now operate in their fullest extent, were formerly corrected by the labors of a numerous people, and the active protection of a wise government. The hills were clothed with rich beds of artificial mould, the rain was collected in vast cisterns, a supply of fresh water was conveyed by pipes and aqueducts to the dry lands. The breed of cattle was encouraged in those parts which were not adapted for tillage, and almost every spot was compelled to yield some production for the use of the inhabitants.</p>
			<p class="foot">Pater ispe colendi Haud facilem esse viam voluit, primusque par artem Movit agros; curis acuens mortalia corda, Nec torpere gravi passus sua Regna veterno. Gibbon, Misc. Works, iv. 540.</p>
			<p class="foot">But Gibbon has here eluded the question about the land “flowing with milk and honey.” He is describing Judæa only, without comprehending Galilee, or the rich pastures beyond the Jordan, even now proverbial for their flocks and herds. (See Burckhardt’s Travels, and Hist of Jews, i. 178.) The following is believed to be a fair statement: “The extraordinary fertility of the whole country must be taken into the account. No part was waste; very little was occupied by unprofitable wood; the more fertile hills were cultivated in artificial terraces, others were hung with orchards of fruit trees the more rocky and barren districts were covered with vineyards.” Even in the present day, the wars and misgovernment of ages have not exhausted the natural richness of the soil. “Galilee,” says Malte Brun, “would be a paradise were it inhabited by an industrious people under an enlightened government. No land could be less dependent on foreign importation; it bore within itself every thing that could be necessary for the subsistence and comfort of a simple agricultural people. The climate was healthy, the seasons regular; the former rains, which fell about October, after the vintage, prepared the ground for the seed; that latter, which prevailed during March and the beginning of April, made it grow rapidly. Directly the rains ceased, the grain ripened with still greater rapidity, and was gathered in before the end of May. The summer months were dry and very hot, but the nights cool and refreshed by copious dews. In September, the vintage was gathered. Grain of all kinds, wheat, barley, millet, zea, and other sorts, grew in abundance; the wheat commonly yielded thirty for one. Besides the vine and the olive, the almond, the date, figs of many kinds, the orange, the pomegranate, and many other fruit trees, flourished in the greatest luxuriance. Great quantity of honey was collected. The balm-tree, which produced the opobalsamum, a great object of trade, was probably introduced from Arabia, in the time of Solomon. It flourished about Jericho and in Gilead.”⁠—Milman’s Hist. of Jews. i. 177.⁠—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.83" name="linknote-1.83">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">83 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.83">return</a>)<br/>
			[ The progress of religion is well known. The use of letter was introduced among the savages of Europe about fifteen hundred years before Christ; and the Europeans carried them to America about fifteen centuries after the Christian Æra. But in a period of three thousand years, the Phœnician alphabet received considerable alterations, as it passed through the hands of the Greeks and Romans.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.84" name="linknote-1.84">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">84 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.84">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Dion Cassius, lib. lxviii. p. 1131.]</p>
			<p>The geographers of antiquity have frequently hesitated to what portion of the globe they should ascribe Egypt. <a href="#linknote-1.85" id="linknoteref-1.85" name="linknoteref-1.85">85</a> By its situation that celebrated kingdom is included within the immense peninsula of Africa; but it is accessible only on the side of Asia, whose revolutions, in almost every period of history, Egypt has humbly obeyed. A Roman præfect was seated on the splendid throne of the Ptolemies; and the iron sceptre of the Mamelukes is now in the hands of a Turkish pacha. The Nile flows down the country, above five hundred miles from the tropic of Cancer to the Mediterranean, and marks on either side the extent of fertility by the measure of its inundations. Cyrene, situate towards the west, and along the sea-coast, was first a Greek colony, afterwards a province of Egypt, and is now lost in the desert of Barca. <a href="#linknote-1.851" id="linknoteref-1.851" name="linknoteref-1.851">851</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.85" name="linknote-1.85">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">85 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.85">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Ptolemy and Strabo, with the modern geographers, fix the Isthmus of Suez as the boundary of Asia and Africa. Dionysius, Mela, Pliny, Sallust, Hirtius, and Solinus, have preferred for that purpose the western branch of the Nile, or even the great Catabathmus, or descent, which last would assign to Asia, not only Egypt, but part of Libya.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.851" name="linknote-1.851">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">851 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.851">return</a>)<br/>
			[ The French editor has a long and unnecessary note on the History of Cyrene. For the present state of that coast and country, the volume of Captain Beechey is full of interesting details. Egypt, now an independent and improving kingdom, appears, under the enterprising rule of Mahommed Ali, likely to revenge its former oppression upon the decrepit power of the Turkish empire.⁠—M.⁠—This note was written in 1838. The future destiny of Egypt is an important problem, only to be solved by time. This observation will also apply to the new French colony in Algiers.⁠—M. 1845.]</p>
			<p>From Cyrene to the ocean, the coast of Africa extends above fifteen hundred miles; yet so closely is it pressed between the Mediterranean and the Sahara, or sandy desert, that its breadth seldom exceeds fourscore or a hundred miles. The eastern division was considered by the Romans as the more peculiar and proper province of Africa. Till the arrival of the Phœnician colonies, that fertile country was inhabited by the Libyans, the most savage of mankind. Under the immediate jurisdiction of Carthage, it became the centre of commerce and empire; but the republic of Carthage is now degenerated into the feeble and disorderly states of Tripoli and Tunis. The military government of Algiers oppresses the wide extent of Numidia, as it was once united under Massinissa and Jugurtha; but in the time of Augustus, the limits of Numidia were contracted; and, at least, two thirds of the country acquiesced in the name of Mauritania, with the epithet of Cæsariensis. The genuine Mauritania, or country of the Moors, which, from the ancient city of Tingi, or Tangier, was distinguished by the appellation of Tingitana, is represented by the modern kingdom of Fez. Salle, on the Ocean, so infamous at present for its piratical depredations, was noticed by the Romans, as the extreme object of their power, and almost of their geography. A city of their foundation may still be discovered near Mequinez, the residence of the barbarian whom we condescend to style the Emperor of Morocco; but it does not appear, that his more southern dominions, Morocco itself, and Segelmessa, were ever comprehended within the Roman province. The western parts of Africa are intersected by the branches of Mount Atlas, a name so idly celebrated by the fancy of poets; <a href="#linknote-1.86" id="linknoteref-1.86" name="linknoteref-1.86">86</a> but which is now diffused over the immense ocean that rolls between the ancient and the new continent. <a href="#linknote-1.87" id="linknoteref-1.87" name="linknoteref-1.87">87</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.86" name="linknote-1.86">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">86 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.86">return</a>)<br/>
			[ The long range, moderate height, and gentle declivity of Mount Atlas, (see Shaw’s Travels, p. 5,) are very unlike a solitary mountain which rears its head into the clouds, and seems to support the heavens. The peak of Teneriff, on the contrary, rises a league and a half above the surface of the sea; and, as it was frequently visited by the Phœnicians, might engage the notice of the Greek poets. See Buffon, Histoire Naturelle, tom. i. p. 312. Histoire des Voyages, tom. ii.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.87" name="linknote-1.87">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">87 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.87">return</a>)<br/>
			[ M. de Voltaire, tom. xiv. p. 297, unsupported by either fact or probability, has generously bestowed the Canary Islands on the Roman empire.]</p>
			<p>Having now finished the circuit of the Roman empire, we may observe, that Africa is divided from Spain by a narrow strait of about twelve miles, through which the Atlantic flows into the Mediterranean. The columns of Hercules, so famous among the ancients, were two mountains which seemed to have been torn asunder by some convulsion of the elements; and at the foot of the European mountain, the fortress of Gibraltar is now seated. The whole extent of the Mediterranean Sea, its coasts and its islands, were comprised within the Roman dominion. Of the larger islands, the two Baleares, which derive their name of Majorca and Minorca from their respective size, are subject at present, the former to Spain, the latter to Great Britain. <a href="#linknote-1.871" id="linknoteref-1.871" name="linknoteref-1.871">871</a> It is easier to deplore the fate, than to describe the actual condition, of Corsica. <a href="#linknote-1.872" id="linknoteref-1.872" name="linknoteref-1.872">872</a> Two Italian sovereigns assume a regal title from Sardinia and Sicily. Crete, or Candia, with Cyprus, and most of the smaller islands of Greece and Asia, have been subdued by the Turkish arms, whilst the little rock of Malta defies their power, and has emerged, under the government of its military Order, into fame and opulence. <a href="#linknote-1.873" id="linknoteref-1.873" name="linknoteref-1.873">873</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.871" name="linknote-1.871">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">871 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.871">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Minorca was lost to Great Britain in 1782. Ann. Register for that year.⁠—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.872" name="linknote-1.872">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">872 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.872">return</a>)<br/>
			[ The gallant struggles of the Corsicans for their independence, under Paoli, were brought to a close in the year 1769. This volume was published in 1776. See Botta, Storia d’Italia, vol. xiv.⁠—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.873" name="linknote-1.873">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">873 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.873">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Malta, it need scarcely be said, is now in the possession of the English. We have not, however, thought it necessary to notice every change in the political state of the world, since the time of Gibbon.⁠—M]</p>
			<p>This long enumeration of provinces, whose broken fragments have formed so many powerful kingdoms, might almost induce us to forgive the vanity or ignorance of the ancients. Dazzled with the extensive sway, the irresistible strength, and the real or affected moderation of the emperors, they permitted themselves to despise, and sometimes to forget, the outlying countries which had been left in the enjoyment of a barbarous independence; and they gradually usurped the license of confounding the Roman monarchy with the globe of the earth. <a href="#linknote-1.88" id="linknoteref-1.88" name="linknoteref-1.88">88</a> But the temper, as well as knowledge, of a modern historian, require a more sober and accurate language. He may impress a juster image of the greatness of Rome, by observing that the empire was above two thousand miles in breadth, from the wall of Antoninus and the northern limits of Dacia, to Mount Atlas and the tropic of Cancer; that it extended in length more than three thousand miles from the Western Ocean to the Euphrates; that it was situated in the finest part of the Temperate Zone, between the twenty-fourth and fifty-sixth degrees of northern latitude; and that it was supposed to contain above sixteen hundred thousand square miles, for the most part of fertile and well-cultivated land. <a href="#linknote-1.89" id="linknoteref-1.89" name="linknoteref-1.89">89</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.88" name="linknote-1.88">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">88 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.88">return</a>)<br/>
			[ Bergier, Hist. des Grands Chemins, l. iii. c. 1, 2, 3, 4, a very useful collection.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="linknote-1.89" name="linknote-1.89">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">89 (<a href="#linknoteref-1.89">return</a>)<br/>
			[ See Templeman’s Survey of the Globe; but I distrust both the Doctor’s learning and his maps.]</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
