<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A considerable portion of this preface has already appeared before us public in the Quarterly Review. <a href="preface.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The editor regrets that he has not been able to find the Italian translation, mentioned by Gibbon himself with some respect. It is not in our great libraries, the Museum or the Bodleian; and he has never found any bookseller in London who has seen it. <a href="preface.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first volume of the quarto, which contained the sixteen first chapters. <a href="preface.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Author, as it frequently happens, took an inadequate measure of his growing work. The remainder of the first period has filled <i>two</i> volumes in quarto, being the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth volumes of the octavo edition. <a href="preface.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first six volumes of the octavo edition. <a href="preface.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>4 See Dr. Robertson’s Preface to his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of America</i>.  <a href="preface.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dion Cassius, (l. liv. p. 736,) with the annotations of Reimar, who has collected all that Roman vanity has left upon the subject. The marble of Ancyra, on which Augustus recorded his own exploits, asserted that <i>he compelled</i> the Parthians to restore the ensigns of Crassus. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, (l. xvi. p. 780,) Pliny the elder, (Hist. Natur. l. vi. c. 32, 35, [28, 29,]) and Dion Cassius, (l. liii. p. 723, and l. liv. p. 734,) have left us very curious details concerning these wars. The Romans made themselves masters of Mariaba, or Merab, a city of Arabia Felix, well known to the Orientals. (See Abulfeda and the Nubian geography, p. 52) They were arrived within three days’ journey of the spice country, the rich object of their invasion.</p>
					<p>Note: It is this city of Merab that the Arabs say was the residence of Belkis, queen of Saba, who desired to see Solomon. A dam, by which the waters collected in its neighborhood were kept back, having been swept away, the sudden inundation destroyed this city, of which, nevertheless, vestiges remain. It bordered on a country called Adramout, where a particular aromatic plant grows: it is for this reason that we real in the history of the Roman expedition, that they were arrived within three days’ journey of the spice country.⁠—G. Compare <i>Malte-Brun, Geogr</i>. Eng. trans. vol. ii. p. 215. The period of this flood has been copiously discussed by Reiske, (<i>Program. de vetustâ Epochâ Arabum, rupturâ cataractæ Merabensis</i>.) Add. Johannsen, <i>Hist. Yemanæ</i>, p. 282. Bonn, 1828; and see Gibbon, note 16. to Chap. L.⁠—M.</p>
					<p>Note: Two, according to Strabo. The detailed account of Strabo makes the invaders fail before Marsuabæ this cannot be the same place as Mariaba. Ukert observes, that Ælius Gallus would not have failed for want of water before Mariaba. (See M. Guizot’s note above.) “Either, therefore, they were different places, or Strabo is mistaken.” (Ukert, <i>Geographie der Griechen und Römer</i>, vol. i. p. 181.) Strabo, indeed, mentions Mariaba distinct from Marsuabæ. Gibbon has followed Pliny in reckoning Mariaba among the conquests of Gallus. There can be little doubt that he is wrong, as Gallus did not approach the capital of Sabæa. Compare the note of the Oxford editor of Strabo.⁠—M. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>








				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
